docs: upstream block ADR, take 2 (#35421)
openedx/edx-platform: docs/decisions/0020-upstream-downstream.rst

.. _triggered series of bugs: https://openedx.atlassian.net/wiki/spaces/COMM/pages/3858661405/Bugs+from+Content+Libraries+V1

We are keen to use the Library Relaunch project to address all of these
problems. So, V2 libraries will interop with courses using a completely
different data model.

Decision
********

We will create a framework where a *downstream* piece of content (e.g. a course
block) can be *linked* to an *upstream* piece of content (e.g., a library
block) with the following properties:

* **Portable:** Links can refer to certain content on the current Open edX
  instance, and in the future they may be able to refer to content on other
  Open edX instances or sites. Links will never include information that is
  internal to a particular Open edX instance, such as foreign keys.

* **Flat:** The *link* is a not a wrapper (like the LibraryContentBlock),
  but simply a piece of metadata directly on the downstream content which
  points to the upstream content. We will no longer rely on precarious
  hash-derived usage keys to establish connection to upstream blocks;

>   like any other block, an upstream-link blocks can be granted whatever block

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  like any other block, an upstream-linked block can be granted whatever block
```

  * Finally, the downstream content will locally save the upstream value of
    customizable fields, allowing the author to *revert* back to them
    regardless of whether the upstream content is actually available.

* **Synchronizable, without surprises:** Downstream content can be *synced*
  with updates that have been made to its linked upstream. This means that the
  latest available upstream content field values will entirely replace all of
  the downstream field values, *except* those which were customized, as
  described in the previous item.

* **Concrete, but flexible:** The internal implementation of upstream-downstream
  syncing will assume that:

  * upstream content belongs to a V2 content library,
  * downstream content belongs to a course on the same instance, and
  * the link is the stringified usage key of the upstream library content.

  This will allow us to keep the implementation straightforward. However, we
  will *not* expose these assumptions in the Python APIs, the HTTP APIs, or in
  the persisted fields, allowing us in the future to generalize to other
  upstreams (such as externally-hosted libraries) and other downstreams (such

>   as a standalone enrollable sequence without a course).

Reviewer: What will happen if the upstream is not from a library but rather from the same course or from another course? (Say someone edits the OLX to put that.) Will we support that or throw an error?

Author: @bradenmacdonald My thinking is that we start conservatively: we refuse to sync from anything except V2 Content Libraries. If the upstream is not a LibraryLocatorV2, we would either raise or warn, as appropriate. In the UX, we could either show an "invalid library" warning, or we could show nothing -- whatever Product prefers. My reasoning here is that I don't want to add course->course syncing as a half-baked, undocumented feature and then have to worry about preserving compatibility for it later.

For course import, in particular, I'm thinking that if someone had a different type of upstream key (like a CourseKey), we would log an import warning, but wouldn't fail the import. We would still preserve the value of `upstream` and faithfully export it, though. That way, hypothetically, if the U release supports CourseKey upstreams, then a U-release-authored course could be safely imported into Sumac and exported out of Sumac without losing any CourseKey upstream connections.

Does that all sound good? I can add a note to the ADR if so.

Reviewer: Yes, I agree :)

Author: Done

        """

        # Metadata related to upstream synchronization
        upstream = String(
            help=("""
                The usage key of a block (generally within a content library)
                which serves as a source of upstream updates for this block,
                or None if there is no such upstream. Please note: It is valid
                for this field to hold a usage key for an upstream block
                that does not exist (or does not *yet* exist) on this instance,
                particularly if this downstream block was imported from a
                different instance.
            """),
            default=None, scope=Scope.settings, hidden=True, enforce_type=True
        )
        upstream_version = Integer(
            help=("""
                Record of the upstream block's version number at the time this
                block was created from it. If upstream_version is smaller
                than the upstream block's latest version, then the user will be
                able to sync updates into this downstream block.
            """),
            default=None, scope=Scope.settings, hidden=True, enforce_type=True,
        )

>         downstream_customized = List(

Reviewer 2: Maybe `Set` instead of `List` here?

Author: 👍🏻

        )

        # Store upstream defaults for customizable fields.
        upstream_display_name = String(...)
        upstream_max_attempts = List(...)
        ...  # We will probably want to pre-define several more of these.

        def get_upstream_field_names(cls) -> dict[str, str]:
            """
            Mapping from each customizable field to field which stores its upstream default.
            XBlocks outside of edx-platform can override this in order to set
            up their own customizable fields.
            """
            return {
                "display_name": "upstream_display_name",
                "max_attempts": "upstream_max_attempts",
            }

        def save(self, *args, **kwargs):
            """
            Update `downstream_customized` when a customizable field is modified.
            Uses `get_upstream_field_names` keys as the list of fields that are
            customizable.
            """
            ...

        @XBlock.handler
        def sync_updates(self, request: Request, suffix=None) -> Response:
            """
            POST handler which applies updates from the upstream block.

>             No request/response data.

Reviewer: I don't think this should be an `@XBlock.handler`, unless we _want_ to support the case where an XBlock completely overrides what it means to sync updates for that type of block. I'd rather move this to the runtime or the `content_libraries` app or a `content_sync` app and enforce that the syncing behavior of all blocks is always consistent.

We can call a `post_sync_handler()` method on each block afterward if you want a slot for customization though.

Reviewer 2: I'm in fuzzy agreement with @bradenmacdonald on this, but I don't have a great sense for where it _should_ go. Was it in the handler here because we originally thought individual XBlocks would be required to override this to get the right behavior?

Author: @ormsbee @bradenmacdonald 

> Was it in the handler here because we originally thought individual XBlocks would be required to override this to get the right behavior?

No, that was not the intention-- I feel pretty strongly that individual XBlock types should **not** get to customize this behavior 😄 I put this here because it was a convenient way of adding the sync capability to every CMS block without adding it LMS block.

> the content_libraries app or a content_sync app 

Right, so I'm trying to strike a balance between (a) having an abstraction layer between syncing and content_libraries, while (b) keeping the whole upstream-downstream idea lightweight since it's so nascent. Making a new content_sync app seemed like it would be overengineering.

> I don't have a great sense for where it *should* go.

Here's what I'm thinking now: we define a CMS-only HTTP API for syncing in cms/djangoapps/contentstore.
* In the case of LC->ModuleStore syncing of components (Sumac), the HTTP API calls out to a new method, `CachingDescriptorSystem.sync_from_upstream`.
* In the case of LC->LC syncing of components (future), the HTTP API would call out to `LearningCoreRuntime.sync_from_upstream`. Generally speaking, syncing from upstream component blocks to downstream component blocks would be done by calling the abstract `Runtime.sync_from_upstream` method on the *downstream* runtime.

Thoughts?

Reviewer: Makes sense to me.

Reviewer 2: I think that's fine.

Author: Added to the ADR

            Responses:
                200: Success
                400: Upstream is missing or invalid
                405: Method other than POST
            """
            ...

>         def sync_from_upstream(self, *, user: User, apply_updates: bool) -> None:

Reviewer: same here, I think these should be moved elsewhere or at least marked as `@final`

Author: Moved
